I'm trying to make this video a bit faster-paced
than the earlier ones in the series --so if
it's too fast for you, hit pause, watch it
twice, look at the subtitles, read the transcript,
or do whatever you feel's necessary.
The three characters you see at the top of
the screen look like they follow exactly the
same pattern.
They don't.
Your textbooks may have taught you that the
symbol they have in common (shown on the lower
half) is a picture of an intersection or a
crossroads.
For the moment, I would file that advice under,
"kind of, sort of, maybe, sometimes".
Looking at our three examples on the top,
we can see that all three of them split this
symbol into two halves, to add a new glyph
in the middle.
It looks like we've got a clear pattern here,
with the glyph added in the middle providing
the sound for the modern character, and the
image of the intersecting roads providing
a hint to the meaning.
If you've heard the sound of the combined
character, tòng, it will always have been
in the two-syllable word hú-tòng, meaning
a small street, lane or alley.
So, in this case, we've got the appealing
illusion that the Chinese language makes a
lot of sense.
The second example doesn't have the same phonetic
pattern, but still, on the whole, we can believe
we're looking at the same "rule", if there
is a rule; and, again, the meaning has to
do with streets, roads and so on.
Given the pattern of the first two characters,
you may be inclined to convince yourself that
the third example conforms to the same standard,
especially if you're learning Chinese in a
classroom setting, and memorizing as many
words as possible before the next exam.
Just like the first example, we've even got
the appealing symmetry of the glyph in the
center providing the phonetic value for the
combined character as a whole.
Although the two characters look and even
sound as if they're examples of the same rule,
they actually demonstrate two fundamentally
different patterns in how the language works,
and in how we have to think about the Chinese
system of radicals.
With the example at the top we'd be entirely
correct to break the word down into its smallest
units; but the etymology for the example at
the bottom only makes sense in its combined
form, and, in fact, breaking it down into
smaller pieces makes less sense.
The radical in the middle of the word wèi
is the "soft leather" radical, and the meaning
of the word has nothing to do with soft leather.
Many people would just stop you from thinking
any further about why the word is written
this way, telling you, "it's just phonetic,
don't worry about it".
Believe it or not, the so-called soft leather
radical is actually a picture of two feet
(pacing in opposite directions) on either
side of a box.
In the combined character, wèi, there are
two more feet added to the picture, for a
total of four.
In this case, very clearly, the radical xíng
does not represent an intersection of roads,
but really does depict two human feet.
Don't believe me?
Well, now you can see the ancient pictographs
on the left side of the screen, and the etymology
leaps out at you right away.
In this case, it's the combined character
as a whole that makes sense, not the individual
parts.
If we think of the radicals as the atoms composing
the language, then the lesson to be learned
here is that some words can only be understood
as a molecule, gathering a few of those atoms
together at once (and, in fact, they stop
making sense when we break them down into
smaller pieces).
The four feet walking around the box are,
apparently, on patrol; so this pictograph
as a whole suggests the meanings "protection",
"defense", and so on.
In this case, it's actually the smaller part,
at the top, that has its meaning only through
a phonetic coincidence: the glyph itself has
nothing to do with leather (whereas, in fact,
Chinese does have several other pictographs
that are directly related to leather and animal
hides).
I think it's fair to say that nobody could
have guessed this from the modern characters,
especially not in the comparative context
of so many glyphs that are assembled the other
way around, and that need to be understood
as atoms rather than molecules.
However, we do get some corroboration from
a third character that sounds like wéi: as
is often the case with really ancient pictographs
in the language, a different version was preserved
as another word, so we can see here (at the
bottom of the screen) another meaning related
to the original image, this time with a wall
added around the outside.
You can imagine that it would be misleading
to explain this third character as just being
"a square around the leather radical", and
it would be even worse to dismiss questions
about why it's written this way by telling
people, "Don't worry about it, it's just phonetic".
However, that is exactly what we end up doing
so often when we're rushing through Chinese
in the classroom context.
So, what seemed like such an obvious pattern
wasn't a pattern at all, when we were looking
at how these characters were formed by combining
two parts into one.
However, we have similar puzzles even when
we're looking at simple glyphs (consisting
of just one symbol).
If your teacher has told you anything about
the character dān, it was probably something
like, "It's just phonetic, don't worry about
it".
However, we can see right away that it is
an ancient pictograph that is trying to depict
something, even if we don't know what it might
be; and we can see from the more ancient form
(shown on the left here) that the two smaller
boxes at the top can't be separated from the
picture as a whole --even if we have no idea
what that symbol is supposed to resemble.
If you try to break it down into smaller "atoms",
you'll get pieces that don't relate to the
meaning of the image at all.
Richard Sears came up with a clever explanation
for this one (Sears is the guy who scanned
these images of ancient characters and put
them on the internet, and it seems that this
explanation is one that he invented himself).
In the same way that we noticed, before, that
the soft-leather radical made more sense in
the context of a larger character, Sears looked
through the combinations of dān to try to
find a context that explained what the pictograph
originally was.
His conclusion was that it depicts a cicada;
if he's correct, that doesn't mean that we
would be wrong to say the symbol is "just
phonetic" when it appears in other contexts,
but it lets us see what the context was that
the symbol was borrowed from.
Overall, I think that this explanation is
a lot more plausible than any of the others
available, but if you wanted to challenge
it, you could basically go through the same
sort of experiment that led Richard Sears
to his conclusion.
You can find the same symbol in other contexts,
you can contrast their meanings, and try to
sort out which one might give a hint as to
the first purpose the pictograph was put to.
However, the most fundamental lesson here
is just that we can't always understand the
character better by breaking it down into
smaller and smaller pieces; sometimes, instead,
we have to put the atoms together into molecules,
and figure out what relationships between
them might be.
The Chinese language is ancient enough that
some false etymologies (following this same
pattern) have been written into the language,
and start to appear as facts.
The symbol you see here is written as two
moons, side by side, and is part of the most
common word for friendship.
Although it might be romantic to explain friendship
as two moons, side by side, the ancient Chinese
were interested in finding another, better
explanation for why the word is written this
way.
So, at some stage, way back in antiquity,
they tried the same trick we just used in
suggesting that dān was originally a picture
of a cicada.
In this case, instead, the idea was that the
two moons were originally two wings, in a
combined form with one of the symbols for
"bird" that you can see here on the right.
This idea is still listed as valid in many
dictionaries, and some computer fonts try
to make both of these characters resemble
wings, in imitation of seal-script characters
that were influenced by the "two wings" theory.
Unfortunately, as you can see here, the evidence
indicates that this just isn't true.
The glyph didn't originally depict two moons,
but it certainly wasn't a pair of wings, either.
If you're familiar with Chinese animal characters,
there was actually a hint that the two wings
theory must be wrong just in looking at the
combined bird character: the bird faces toward
the left, so it wouldn't make much sense for
the wings to be positioned in front of its
face.
In this case, we can't guess the original
meaning of the character by looking at it
in combination, and we also can't figure it
out by breaking the modern symbol into smaller
parts.
Neither moons nor wings, the most ancient
form of the symbol is depicting something
that we still can't guess at.
So, our practical conclusions here run contrary
to the logic presumed by the system of radicals:
sometimes, the basic unit of meaning is not
the atom, but the molecule.
Larger groups of symbols are sometimes the
only way to know what a single symbol means
in isolation.
However, there is absolutely no pattern, rule
or system involved; we just have observations
to compare to other observations.
Sometimes, the names and meanings of the radicals
are misleading, because the system of radicals
is much less ancient than the pictographs
they're used to define.
Sometimes, what seems to be a phonetic pattern
is not phonetic at all; conversely, what sometimes
looks like a symbolic pattern, linking two
characters visually, may be arbitrary and
misleading.
When your teachers tell you "don't worry about
it, it's just phonetic", you might find it
really rewarding to ignore their advice, and
take some time to look into the real etymologies
of the characters, to discover there's a lot
more to know than just that.